Explain @ConfigGroup and @ConfigRoot in more details (#2589)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/extension-authors-guide.adoc

public class FileConfig {

    /**

>      * Enable logging to file.

Reviewer: "to *a* file" maybe?

Author: Done.

    String format;

    /**

>      * The log level.

Reviewer: Why remove the qualification here?  There are several different log level configuration items, so it's good to clarify what scope each applies to.

Author: @dmlloyd What you said is true in a broader view. There are more log level items in a configuration, but in this example there is only one, a `file`, so due to low level of details explained in this paragraph, having this qualifier was confusing in regards to the matter of this specific example (is this about a file `path`, or a `file` namespace). I can change this back, but only after adding more details to the description, i.e. "The level of logs to be written into the file". Please let me know if you accept this.

Author: Please see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/2589/commits/5ed96c05b1e317e973a3a3eeea0ed44a4a596ed3

     */
    @ConfigItem(defaultValue = "ALL")
    Level level;

    /**

>      * The name of file where logs will be stored.

Reviewer 2: Ah, in fact you spotted it, but you updated the javadoc in the comments of this documentation but not in the original source file :).

Updating the source file is definitely more important.

Author: Done.

>      * The name of file where logs will be stored.

Reviewer 2: And we should apply the same change here.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 3: same comment here @sarxos

Author: @cescoffier This this already modified in accordance to @gsmet request. Please see aab71c4. These two commits will be squashed after I have final approval for these changes.

     */

>     @ConfigItem(defaultValue = "application.log")

Reviewer: This change should be accompanied by an update to `.gitignore` to change `quarkus.log` to `application.log`, else we'll see it show up accidentally in commits before long.

Reviewer: I also see a reference to `quarkus.log` in `test-framework/common/src/main/java/io/quarkus/test/common/PropertyTestUtil.java`.  Better make sure that won't be affected.

Reviewer 2: Should we really change the default log filename? I don't see the new one as an improvement.

Let's remove this change from this PR, it should be discussed separately as mentioned by @dmlloyd .

Author: Hi @dmlloyd, @gsmet. I do not agree. Please note that this modification does not change any logic linked to logging, nor default logs placement nor any file names connected to logging mechanisms. This change is embedded in context of this specific example, an example demonstrating how configuration can be structured into classes, and should be treated as such (as example, not as a reference where logs are located and in which files). I modified this line because file name used here, namely `quarkus.log`, is very confusing in regards to the matter of this example, where users need to understand how it coincides with the `quarkus.log` namespace (not file name) used in configuration. So not to confuse `quarkus.log` namespace with `quarkus.log` file I changed it to `application.log`.

Author: So what I would suggest to have your comments addressed and keep the example simple and straightforward, is to change `FileConfig.java` by adding:

```java
public static final String DEFAULT_LOG_FILE_NAME = "quarkus.log";
```

And use it there:

```java
@ConfigItem(defaultValue = DEFAULT_LOG_FILE_NAME)
File path;
```

And in `PropertyTestUtil.java` by changing:

```java
public static String getLogFileLocation() {
    return getLogFileLocation("quarkus.log");
}
```

To:

```java
public static String getLogFileLocation() {
    return getLogFileLocation(FileConfig.DEFAULT_LOG_FILE_NAME);
}
```

Same static reference will be used in example we are discussing and keep it non confusing. I hope this is ok.

Author: Please see https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/pull/2589/commits/5ed96c05b1e317e973a3a3eeea0ed44a4a596ed3

Reviewer: Maybe using an existing system like logging in this doc was a mistake. :)

We'll always be trying to keep it in sync, and there will be questions when it isn't.

Reviewer: Also it makes the PR difficult to review...

Author: @dmlloyd Yes, it would be better if we came up with a better example in the past (not an exact copy of internal logging system configuration), but since it's already there it would be a waste of time to implement something new. IMO this example is sufficient and we should simply not try to keep it in sync since this example is only to demonstrate how configuration can be composed into structure, not how logging can, or should be configured. Moreover, it's already out-of-sync because e.g. `RotationConfig` is missing in example, where it's used in the real system.

Reviewer: All the more reason why it's a bad example.  And it's clearly not a waste of time to change it at all, because you would invest time and the result would be something clearer (forever).  Saying it's a waste of time to fix this is like saying that it's a waste of time to ever improve anything, so long as it meets a bare minimum standard.  It's OK to have high standards!

>     @ConfigItem(defaultValue = DEFAULT_LOG_FILE_NAME)

Reviewer 2: The constant is not defined here.

Author: @gsmet I didn't want to confuse reader readers with `quarkus.log` file name vs `quarkus.log` namespace and thus I didn't include it here on purpose. I thought that having a static placeholder will be enough to keep it simple and readable but not confusing. IMO, since this code is just a sample used for a demonstration purpose and to explain how configuration structures and nesting can be done, it does not have to be as strict as the runnable code. Can we leave this as it is? I would like to avoid having any mention of `quarkus.log` in terms other than a namespace, here.

Reviewer 2: We need this example to compile. We can't give a doc example that doesn't compile. So if you don't want to use the constant, just use `quarkus.log` as it was before. It is just an example so it doesn't need to be totally similar to the code we have in Quarkus.

Author: Will change to "application.log" then. As I said before - I do not want to have `quarkus.log` file name because it's confusing with `quarkus.log` log namespace. By doing this it will compile and will remain non confusing :)

    LogConfiguration config;
}
----

A configuration property name can be split into segments. For example, a property name like
`quarkus.log.file.enable` can be split into the following segments:

* `quarkus` - a namespace claimed by {project-name} which is a prefix for all `@ConfigRoot` classes,
* `log` - a name segment which corresponds to the `LogConfiguration` class annotated with `@ConfigRoot`,
* `file` - a name segment which corresponds to the `file` field in this class,
* `enabled` - a name segment which corresponds to `enable` field in `FileConfig` class annotated with `@ConfigGroup`.

<1> The `FileConfig` class is annotated with `@ConfigGroup` to indicate that this is an aggregate
configuration object containing a collection of configurable properties, rather than being a simple configuration
key type.
<2> The `@ConfigRoot` annotation indicates that this object is a configuration root group, in this case one which
corresponds to a `log` segment. A class name is used to link configuration root group with the segment from a

> property name. This class name is `LogConfiguration` so the `Configuration` part is stripped off, the remaining `Log`

Reviewer 2: s/so the/: the/
There's no consequence here.

Author: Will change.

is lowercased and becomes a `log`. Since all `@ConfigRoot` annotated classes uses `quarkus` as a prefix, this finally

> becomes `quarkus.log` and represents a properties which names begins with `quarkus.log.*`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
becomes `quarkus.log` and represents the properties which names begin with `quarkus.log.*`.
```

Author: Will change.

<3> Here the `LoggingProcessor` injects a `LogConfiguration` instance automatically by detecting the `@ConfigRoot`
annotation.

A corresponding `application.properties` for the above example could be:

[source%nowrap,properties]
----
quarkus.log.file.enable=true
quarkus.log.file.level=DEBUG
quarkus.log.file.path=/tmp/debug.log
----

> Since `format` is not defined in these properties, a default value from `@ConfigItem` will be used instead.

Reviewer 2: s/a default value/the default value/

Author: Will do.
